# Separating science from the cathedral
Created 2022 11 02 23:39

---

Towards composable science

As highlighted by many independent thinkers, science has become sick and stagnant with little semblance of it's original stated goals. The scientific process has dwindled to a husk of its former self, with professors spending most of their time on superfluous tasks rather than free inquiry. Labs around the world are no longer intellectual playgrounds but simply salary mills optimized for stability and prestige as a currency. Like vampiric succubae the administrators of universities around the world have successfully modified the daily work of the smartest people in the world to their own benefit, their own salaries. With the formation of a global ledger with high security, public contracts with clear terms and decentralized compute and data storage a new hope is starting to form.

Active scientists that see the issues in their respective institutions are using the tried and boring process of improving the situation- incremental iteration on near settled science. 2022 has seen a boom in new proposed solutions, some starting small and others going big. Standing on the flimsy shoulders of the bull market grifters who are attempting to build Decentralized Autonomous Organizations, scientists were inspired to take approaches learned from decentralized finance and apply it to various issues in today's scientific landscape. You have peer review, but web3; 'New' funding models which skirt firm investment strategies by replacing company shares with worthless tokens. Changing the mechanics of the investing model doesn't make anything new happen, just changes the way it's done. Data storage and brokering but instead of a company have a DAO with community ownership. Who decides the terms of sale for new requests for quote when the data is of intangible value and inherently non fungible? We haven't seen a real DAO exist as promised today. One of the main concerns with DAOs is their inability to execute.

While I truly respect everyone who is going after novel approaches to perform science, I caution everyone that they are not thinking broadly enough and they are not thinking from first principles on how science can be done but rather applying new ideas on execution to their current practices. To help tear down the state's control of scientific authority, it's necessary to think of the purpose of the processes and the role of institutions. Simply applying novel tooling to current ways of conducting business isn't going to fundamentally change the way business is done, just iterate your way into a more complex way of doing business.

The earliest scientific journals had a vast array of purposes and many failed over the years. Nature's mission has been coopted by the managerial class which represents just one of the many instances of loss of innovation.

>It is intended, FIRST, to place before the general public the grand results of Scientific Work and Scientific Discovery; and to urge the claims of Science to a more general recognition in Education and in Daily Life; and, SECONDLY, to aid Scientific men themselves, by giving early information of all advances made in any branch of Natural knowledge throughout the world, and by affording them an opportunity of discussing the various Scientific questions which arise from time to time.

https://media.nature.com/full/nature-cms/uploads/ckeditor/attachments/7568/mission.pdf


>First, to serve scientists through prompt publication of significant advances in any branch of science, and to provide a forum for the reporting and discussion of news and issues concerning science. Second, to ensure that the results of science are rapidly disseminated to the public throughout the world, in a fashion that conveys their significance for knowledge, culture and daily life.

https://www.nature.com/nature/journal-information

Journals such as nature have found themselves as dogfood for scientists, a supplement for rather than simply dissemination of new discoveries and impacts for common citizens. This inversion of purpose has resulted in articles becoming very structured and limiting. The high bar of acceptance and massively large prestige associated with a publication in Nature has caused an economy of prestige to develop, with this being the primary currency which drives scientific experimentation, knowledge production, and very strong specialization on topics. The systems in place in for publication of Nature don't reward multidisciplinary free inquiry. Once at the top, there is little incentive at all for a scientist to perform daring work, in fact they are heavily disincentivised.

The powerful consensus driving and weekly publication of Nature means that it has become de facto truth maker and timeline setter. In the process of releasing a publication on a topic that discovery is celebrated with 'this is the universal truth'. Or so we think. The perverse economy of prestige has infiltrated most scientific endeavors, and a pressure for continual publication which meets or exceeds the impact of the first publication of an author means that unsavory methods are often used to turn the wheel of grant application, publication, reward with new prestige, grant application, reward with new prestige, publication, reward with new prestige puts enormous pressure on principle investigators. A casual observer walking the halls of the labs at research institutions would expect to see the lead scientist collaborating, teaching, developing new hypotheses and testing them. However they would quickly see that the lead is spending the majority of their time in the office, isolated. The outside observer would possibly see this as deep thinking, however it is all used to write grant applications for the money to keep the lab open. Grantors look at prestigious associations with high impact labs, high impact publications, and general credibility of the work as they determine the grant details. A publication in Nature is extremely prestigious and offers many positive feedbacks for the publication and grant award cycle and the scientists will do any thing at all to keep their lab open. When I was working with organic chemistry scientists, I discovered that underneath the surface of honest free inquiry and peer review there's a dark underbelly of deceit and lies. Many people know that organic chemistry is an extremely difficult discipline and medical students will confirm that with their own accounts. So when I was working in the lab and reading publications I found some weird chemistry that I'd never seen before and consulted my professor. During that conversation he tore down the credibility of published results, opening my eyes to the political positioning, relationship building and games that are played by specialists in very niche knowledge. The chemistry I observed was likely a red herring meant to throw colleagues that compete for grant money off of the trail of a new discovery. Meant to directly go against the scientific principles of reproducibility, shared knowledge production and improvement of the human condition. This perverse behavior is entirely explained by the high pressure funding and publication processes that permeate science today. After learning about these misgivings I wanted to see if this happens in other domains of scientific inquiry- and it seems like it sure does. brutal competition for prestige with leads to grant awards is not locked to organic chemistry. 

Taking a step back and thinking about what journals and peer review actually accomplish may reveal new patterns of scientific discovery using the tools we now have at our disposal. The institutions which control the money, dissemination of information, and do the experiments are built on a web of prestige and trust. The printing press distributed this trust from a few people with in person interactions to the general public , who ideally would keep the scientists accountable. Scientific journals use this trust to coordinate effort between scientists and direct funding but overall very little has changed in nearly 200 years. Discover some new knowledge, shout it out to the world via print, and maybe share notes with people that write back to you. Use the proof of publication to justify further funding from various sources, typically commercial interests or public institutions and agencies. In the network age, what new possibilities will be unlocked to finally revolutionize the scientific process?

I posit that there's a need to think about moving the process of knowledge creation to the edges using modern tools such as global, high trust ledgers, distributed data collection, deterministic data processing, immutable timestamped data, immutable timestamped computing, robust new communication processes on a network that isn't owned by the editors at scientific journals but the people doing the science themselves. Science has been coopted by NPCs looking to gather a salary by shuffling papers around and has lost it's vigor.

From the large perspective, scientific journals with referential links and publication to the broad population fundamentally achieve two things. Marking a point in time where a discovery was made, adding flesh to the body of knowledge we define our world with, and awarding prestige to the people who contribute. Progress in scientific models and understanding of nature is marked by new discoveries which refer to the past discoveries. in order to achieve this goal, the publications must be done in a way that is repeatable and with credible. As previously discussed the incentive structure which powers most of today's science is resulting in concerns across the world and is being recognized as a crisis which undermines public trust and brings the validity of large sections of science into question. In simple words, the organizations that fund science want to fund new ideas, not verify past results. Authors are encouraged to protect their position of prestige and publish half-truths to throw off competing labs. Data collection methods and processing are not fully transparent which prevents independent verification of results. Data brokerage incentivizes economic rent collection rather than truth. 

This crisis is recognized and there are many methods that are being attempted to combat the phenomenon using tools that currently exist. However these are the same tools that have made science difficult, the computer. Our current computing stack continues to evolve, whether or not they really need to. The rapid changes of computing is inherently non-compliant with the long term nature of certain science experiments. Specialized scientific instruments run custom software on the latest operating systems at the time of sale. You might be able to get your $10MM instrument to run great on windows '98, and your production in the first few years with the instrument are hiccup free as your entire software stack is current, and is still being maintained by the original developers. You bought this instrument planning to use it for the rest of your career and possible hand it down to the next scientist to use. When Microsoft releases Windows XP you jump on the new productivity suite and your $10MM asset instantly becomes more difficult to use effectively. The IT department in your institution sees your old software as a security risk, and pleads to update the operating system to the latest offerings so that their job is easier. But your instrument is stuck, and the team that made the custom software is no longer working on the old stuff but the latest software for their new instrument. 

This story is common across meatspace labs which routinely use 20+ year old equipment to perform experiments. physical tools don't change at the same rate of software. As a result your instruments are locked into special networks or are air-gapped from the rest of the network. Old data and file formats, cable interfaces (hello serial ports), isolation from your internal network and clunky slow computers stick around just to run your $10MM machine that you had planned on using for the rest of your career. The breakneck pace of change that the modern compute stack goes through is simply destroying your productivity by making it difficult to move scientific data, process the data, and draw conclusions on the experiments that are performed. These problems are incessant and unrelenting across the physical sciences such as chemistry, biology, and physics. This dissonance between progress of physical scientific instruments and the software that runs on them presents an opportunity for vendors to sell expensive Software as a Service packages and milk capital out of the hands of the scientists without providing any meaningful benefit to the labs mission. it's an accepted cost planned in to the budget of every lab. Why do we accept this as a fact of life? deprecated software running on old operating systems and requiring special packages. A modern answer to this problem is to use Virtual machines when possible, however that isn't always workable since the instruments need direct access to the computer's I/O ports or possibly special I/O cards with their own drivers. 

From a software perspective, the scientific process can be stated in terms of Data. Data collection, processing, and sharing. Computers used in data collection are right there at the interface between the analogue world and the digital, bridging the gaps between meatspace and CPUs. These computers shall last the lifetime of the instrument, somewhere on the span of decades, rather than years or months as they do today. This would unlock mountains of resources for living scientists.

There's a saying in science that the latest discoveries are built on the shoulders of giants, as slow progression is made. If that's the case, the most appropriate use of the original discovery in a previous paper would be to actually do that experiment again in the new one, linking the data collection, processing, and sharing in silico with public/private key encryption to provide data provenance, rather than on paper with loose links maintained by peer review boards of scientific journals and backwater data sharing (if that ever happens). One possible mode of the scientific process would be to produce original data collection but reprocess the reference data sets and conclusions which were used in the experiment. A simple but concrete example would be an original experiment that determined collected data on acceleration due to gravity, and determined that this quantity can be represented by 9.8m/s2. Then, the next scientist would like to take that conclusion and hypothesize that a baseball thrown 100 m into the air would have a hang time of 10 seconds. To test this hypothesis they will take their original data collection in combination with the data and processing from the gravity experiment to test the hypothesis and draw a new conclusion. This would be coordinated on the Urbit network, and event logs/data from the first would be cryptographically signed to show data provenance. Science done in this manner would in fact be _composable_ and would no longer need peer review processes at all. Science as building blocks. Why would you need to trust that a review board vetted the data and that the gravitational constant is in fact 9.8 m/s2 when you could rederive the constant as a part of your own work? this is infinitely better than stodgy peer review and journal process. In this new paradigm of scientific work we could see an audit of the core scientific discoveries of the last millenia, and clearly define the scientific record with new data collection and processing, backed by strong sense of identity, composability, and immutability.

One could imagine that a machine that ran an experiment with Urbit OS can be put on ice for eternity, and be revived at will to rerun the experiment on a current underlying OS. As an overlay OS, the urbit instance would not need to be updated to the latest drivers, memory management, I/O interfaces or whatever innovations in instrumentation have happened since the first experiment yet still guarantee that the experiment was ran with the same exact parameters as it had 100 years ago. Even without re-running the physical data collection side an urbit ship associated with an original paper would be shareable, along with it's script for data processing, and its original data. If we had this, then one could imagine that current science is no longer anthropomorphized into standing on shoulders, but simply a series of solid state functions each derived from previous or adjacent discoveries. The body of knowledge we call settled science would literally be settled on the blockchain, where cryptographic proofs will mark the entries. This would replace the need for academic publishers forever, rather than emulate them with web3 tooling.

When thinking about the fundamentals of scientific replication and what the introduction of computers have done for it, it's possible to see that computers have exacerbated the problem. Before computers, scientists would be doing far fewer calculations, collecting smaller data sets, and sharing them via lab notebook. Since all of this was happening in the analogue world and using relatively simple mathematics, peers of the scientist could easily review the data collection and information gathering steps of the experiment. In the post computer world, the review process became much more complicated with the introduction of software processed data. For an uncompromising review to take place, the exact computing environment of the principle investigator would need to replicated and shared so that the reviewer could explore and reprocess the data from the same lens as the author. This requires the reviewer to be proficient in whatever software the author used. This is doable in the current time using docker containers or something similar, however it is restricting science to the time frame of software development and code rot. A 100 year computer is needed for 100 year science.

Urbit's Solid State Interpreter, PKI infrastructure, and ability (soon uqbar) to write information to the Ethereum ledger can be leveraged to do something that has never been done before in science.